Document file system object content addressing (#10479)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/store/file-system-object/content-address.md

# Content-Addressing File System Objects

For many operations, Nix needs to calculate [content addresses](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-content-address) of [file system objects][file system object].
Usually this is needed as part of content addressing [store objects], since store objects always have a root file system object.
But some command-line utilities also just work on "raw" file system objects, not part of any store object.

## Serialising File System Objects { #serial}

> Every content addressing scheme Nix uses ultimately involves feeding data into a [hash function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function), and getting back an opaque fixed-size digest which is deemed a content address.

Author: > Maybe just treat the three methods equally and skip the "serializing or not" distinction?

Well, I am not sure to what extent `FileSerialisationMethod` is exposed to the user. (E.g. if `nix nar cat-file` becomes more generic.) To the extent that it is, I think the grouping is useful.

> Every content addressing scheme Nix uses ultimately involves feeding data into a [hash function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function), and getting back an opaque fixed-size digest which is deemed a content address.

Author: I moved that paragraph up to the previous section, however.

  This can cause FSOs that Nix should consider equal to hash to different values on different machines, just because the dates differ.

- As a practical consideration, the TAR format is the only truly universal format in the Unix environment.
  It has many problems, such as an inability to deal with long file names and files larger than 2^33 bytes.
  Current implementations such as GNU Tar work around these limitations in various ways.

For these reasons, Nix has its very own archive format—the Nix Archive (NAR) format,
which is carefully designed to avoid the problems described above.

The exact specification of the Nix Archive format is in `protocols/nix-archive.md`

## Content addressing File System Objects beyond a single serialisation pass

Serialising the entire tree and then hashing that binary string is not the only option for content addressing, however.
Another technique is that of a [Merkle graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree), where previously computed hashes are included in subsequent byte strings to be hashed.

This creates the possibility of hashing reflecing the graph structure of file system objects:

> We can first hash (serialised) child objects, and then hash parent objects using the hashes of their children in the serialisation of the parent.

Author: ```suggestion
In particular, hashing can reflect the graph structure of file system objects:
we can first hash (serialised) child objects, and then hash parent objects using the hashes of their children in the serialisation of the parents.
```

# Content-Addressing File System Objects

For many operations, Nix needs to calculate [a content addresses](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-content-address) of [a file system object][file system object].
Usually this is needed as part of content addressing [store objects], since store objects always have a root file system object.
But some command-line utilities also just work on "raw" file system objects, not part of any store object.

Every content addressing scheme Nix uses ultimately involves feeding data into a [hash function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function), and getting back an opaque fixed-size digest which is deemed a content address.
The various *methods* of content addressing thus differ in how abstract data (in this case, a file system object and its descendents) are fed into the hash function.

## Serialising File System Objects { #serial }

The simplest method is to serialise the entire file system object tree into a single binary string, and then hash that binary string, yielding the content address.

> In this section we describe the extent methods of serialising file system objects.

Reviewer: I don't understand "extent methods". Could this be a typo?

Author: Oh I just meant the ones that currently exist, letting slip I want more of them hehe :)
```suggestion
In this section we describe the currently-supported methods of serialising file system objects.
```
```suggestion
In this section we describe the supported methods of serialising file system objects.
```
```suggestion
In this section we describe the methods of serialising file system objects.
```
you can pick!

Reviewer: It won't let me!

Let's try this:

```suggestion
In this section we describe the extent methods of serialising file system objects.
```

Reviewer: Nope. I'm in "all commits" mode, but it won't let me. Could you amend it?

Reviewer: Oh, right, this branch is organization-owned.

Author: Just say which one you want then?

Author: (Your last suggestion was a no op, so I don't know which you picked.)

### Flat { #serial-flat }

A single file object can just be hashed by its contents.
This is not enough information to encode the fact that the file system object is a file,
but if we *already* know that the FSO is a single non-executable file by other means, it is sufficient.

### Nix Archive (NAR) { #serial-nix-archive }

> For the other cases of FSOs, especially directories with arbitrary descendents, we need a more complex serialisation format.

Reviewer: FSO is jargon. Could you expand that everywhere?

Author: ```suggestion
For the other cases of [file system objects][file system object], especially directories with arbitrary descendents, we need a more complex serialisation format.
```
Oh I thought I got rid of all the "FSO"s.

Examples of such serialisations are the ZIP and TAR file formats.
However, for our purposes these formats have two problems:

- They do not have a canonical serialisation, meaning that given an FSO, there can
be many different serialisations.
  For instance, TAR files can have variable amounts of padding between archive members;
  and some archive formats leave the order of directory entries undefined.

>   This is bad because we use serialisation to compute cryptographic hashes over FSOs, and therefore require the serialisation to be unique.
>   Otherwise, the hash value can depend on implementation details or environment
> settings of the serialiser.

Reviewer: It doesn't follow from hashing per se. Hashing unpredictable data is a way to gather entropy. Doesn't apply here, but "therefore" would be too strong.

```suggestion
  This would be bad because we use serialisation to compute cryptographic hashes over file system objects, and for those hashes to be useful as a content address or for integrity checking, uniqueness is crucial.
  Otherwise, correct hashes would report false mismatches, and the store would fail to find the content.
```

- They store more information than we have in our notion of FSOs, such as time stamps.
  This can cause FSOs that Nix should consider equal to hash to different values on different machines, just because the dates differ.

- As a practical consideration, the TAR format is the only truly universal format in the Unix environment.

>   It has many problems, such as an inability to deal with long file names and files larger than 233 bytes.

Reviewer 2: 233 -> 2^33

  Current implementations such as GNU Tar work around these limitations in various ways.

For these reasons, Nix has its very own archive format—the Nix Archive (NAR) format,

> which is carefully designed to avoided the problems described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is carefully designed to avoid the problems described above.
```

The exact specification of the Nix Archive format is in `protocols/nix-archive.md`

## Content addressing File System Objects beyond a single serialisation pass

Serialising the entire tree and then hashing that binary string is not the only option for content addressing, however.

> There is also the [Merkle DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree) of multiple rounds of serialisation and hashing, where previously computed hashes are included in subsequent byte strings to be hashed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another technique is that of a [Merkle graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree), where previously computed hashes are included in subsequent byte strings to be hashed, reflective of the graph structure of the input.
```

Author: I don't want to require "reflective of the graph structure of the input", because systems that just do chunking of long opaque data to create a Merkle tree also count. (Indeed, IIRC that was the original Merkle tree.) That is how BLAKE works internally, for example.

Author: Conversely I tried to make the *next* paragraph about how we get additional benefits when the Merkle Graph structure respects the file system object graph structure.

Reviewer: SGTM!

Fwiw, "multiple rounds" felt wrong because of key derivation functions, and I was too careful to simplify.

> This creates the possibility of hashing reflecing the graph structure of file system objects:

Author: I'm a bit confused, I did *not* want to talk about structure in the previous paragraph because I want to talk about it in this paragraph --- I like the separation of concerns so the reader doesn't need to ingest too many concepts at once.

For me the conceptual order is:

1. We don't have to hash everything in one go
2. We can hash little by little matching the semantic graph structure in particular
3. Extra benefits from the above

We can first hash (serialised) child objects, and then hash parent objects using the hashes of their children in the serialisation of the parent.
With such a system, different file system object trees that share a common subtree will have the same hash for that common subtree, and this in turn opens the door to new methods of deduplication to save storage / bandwidth.

> Nix currently doesn't utilise these opportunities for deduplication, but that might change in the future.

Author: The last sentence is not implemented, but the previous sentence *is* implemented in the form of Git hashing. We don't take advantage of it, but it is true that the same subtree will have the same git hash.

Currently, there is one such Merkle DAG content addressing method supported.

### Git ([experimental][xp-feature-git-hashing]) { #git }

> **Warning**
>
> This method is part of the [`git-hashing`][xp-feature-git-hashing] experimental feature.

Git's file system model is very close to Nix's, and so Git's content addressing method is a pretty good fit.
Just as with regular Git, files and symlinks are hashed as git "blobs", and directories are hashed as git "trees".

However, this is one small difference between Nix's and Git's file system model that causes some friction.

> Plain files, executable files, and symlinks are not distinguished in and of themselves, but by their context: by the directory entry that refers to them.

Author: Nice!

That means so long as the root object is a directory, there is no problem:
every non-directory object is owned by a parent directory, and the entry that refers to it provides the missing information.
However, if the root object is not a directory, then we have no way of knowing which one of an executable file, non-executable file, or symlink it is supposed to be.

In response to this, we have decided to treat a bare file as non-executable file.
This is similar to do what we do with [flat serialisation](#flat), which also lacks this information.
To avoid an address collision, attempts to hash a bare executable file or symlink will result in an error (just as would happen for flat serialisation also).
Thus, Git can encode some, but not all of Nix's "File System Objects", and this sort of content-addressing is likewise partial.

> In the future, we may adopt another Merkle DAG format which is capable of representing all Nix file system objects.

Reviewer: What about hashing a directory with a `.` entry? That makes our things representable; just not directly usable in git.
It seems that we're promising not to support that, which maybe we shouldn't promise? Or should that be `git-nix` or something?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future, we may support a Git-like hash for such file system objects, or we may adopt another Merkle DAG format which is capable of representing all Nix file system objects.
```
